Improving family access to dying patients during the COVID-19 pandemic - The Lancet Respiratory Medicine
Skip to Main Content
Email/UsernamePasswordShowForgot password?Remember meDon’t have an account?Create a Free Account
If you don't remember your password, you can reset it by entering your email address and clicking the Reset Password button. You will then receive an email that contains a secure link for resetting your passwordEmail*If the address matches a valid account an email will be sent to __email__ with instructions for resetting your passwordCancel
Comment|
Volume 9, ISSUE 4, P335-337, April 01, 2021 Published:January 12, 2021DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/S2213-2600(21)00025-4Improving family access to dying patients during the COVID-19 pandemicPrevious ArticleSARS-CoV-2 evolution and vaccines: cause for concern?Next Articleα1-Antitrypsin deficiency and the risk of COVID-19: an urgent call to action
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, most health-care organisations have implemented policies to restrict visitor access. Although there are exceptions to some of these policies, including limited visiting for patients nearing the end of life, they still have profound effects on the dying and their family members. We are still in the midst of the pandemic, but there are compelling reasons to expand access of family members to their loved ones as they near the end of life, despite the risk of infection.Hospital visitor policies represent an attempt to balance two competing priorities. Restrictions reduce the chance of harm from infection, but increase the chance of harm from isolation or separation. Exemptions can reduce isolation and allow for a more compassionate response to patients nearing the end of life, but they potentially increase the risk of COVID-19 transmission.It is too early to assess the burden of complex grief of family members who endure the loss of a loved one during the pandemic, and we have little bereavement data from previous pandemics.1Supporting adults bereaved through COVID-19: a rapid review of the impact of previous pandemics on grief and bereavement.J Pain Symptom Manage. 2020; 60: e33-e39
We know that restrictive visitor policies are associated with a higher frequency of delirium and anxiety in patients.2Flexible versus restrictive visiting policies in ICUs: a systematic review and meta-analysis.Crit Care Med. 2018; 46: 1175-1180
We also know that separation from the patient, the absence of normal death rites, and the disruption of social support networks are risk factors for poor bereavement outcomes.3Bereavement support on the frontline of COVID-19: recommendations for hospital clinicians.J Pain Symptom Manage. 2020; 60: e81-e86
Virtual communication is not feasible for some family members, and might be distressing if the patient is dyspnoeic, delirious, or intubated.There are also little data on the harms of liberalising visitor policies. Liberal visitor policies in intensive care units do not appear to be associated with an increased risk of nosocomial infection, but they do increase the risk of burnout among staff.2Flexible versus restrictive visiting policies in ICUs: a systematic review and meta-analysis.Crit Care Med. 2018; 46: 1175-1180
Zhou and colleagues4Nosocomial infections among patients with COVID-19, SARS and MERS: a rapid review and meta-analysis.Ann Transl Med. 2020; 8: 629
studied rates of nosocomial infections in the early days of the COVID-19 outbreak in Wuhan, China, before visitor restrictions and routine personal protective equipment were implemented, and found that nosocomial infections accounted for a third of all cases, but only 2% were due to people other than hospital staff.The scarcity of good data is frustrating, but ultimately not relevant. Even if we knew the precise risks of different approaches to visitor policies, we would not be any closer to finding a balanced approach because the risks cannot be compared directly. How much psychomorbidity is justified by the prevention of a single COVID-19 infection?Neither the risk of transmission nor the harm of isolation can ever be reduced to zero. Hospital outbreaks occur due to asymptomatic staff, even when there are no visitors, and unrestricted visitor policies would not address isolation in individuals with distant or no family. But the harms of isolation are clearly amplified for people approaching the end of life. Faced with a choice between having acute hospital care or having unrestricted access to family members, some dying patients choose to remain at home, even if that means uncontrolled symptoms and an unsustainable burden on family members and community care services that are already stretched by the pandemic.Even end-of-life visitor exemptions can be harmful, if they apply only to people in the final days of life. Prognostication is challenging, and patients can sometimes deteriorate suddenly without any of the usual warning signs. Such occurences have led to situations in which family members were forced to leave the bedside of patients who appeared to have months to live, and were then unable to return quickly enough after a sudden deterioration. Moreover, patients in their final days and hours are often minimally responsive and unable to interact with family members; the opportunity to spend so-called quality time has passed. Otani and colleagues5Meaningful communication before death, but not present at the time of death itself, is associated with better outcomes on measures of depression and complicated grief among bereaved family members of cancer patients.J Pain Symptom Manage. 2017; 54: 273-279
found that being present at the time of death was not associated with any difference in the incidence of complicated grief among family members, but having the opportunity for meaningful conversation (eg, being able to say goodbye) was associated with reduced symptoms of depression and complicated grief.Limiting the number of visitors allowed at one time might seem a reasonable compromise, but it can also lead to problems. Considering that cohabiting family members often visit at the same time, separating them at the bedside does not reduce the chances of transmission to each other or to the patient. Instead, they often choose to take turns, cycling between being at the bedside and being outside the hospital multiple times in a single day. Because the greatest risk of transmission occurs during the removal of personal protective equipment and transit within the hospital (eg, encountering other staff, travel in elevators), this cycling is likely to increase the risk of transmission substantially more than simply allowing all visitors to remain at the bedside for the duration of their visit (space permitting).We have also found that inconsistent visitor policies among different sites can be problematic. Patient transfers are very common as patients near the end of life and are transferred from acute care to palliative settings. But if the receiving facility has stricter limits on visiting than the sending facility, patients often refuse the transfer, which increases the burden on the acute care facilities by adding to the population of those classed in the so-called alternate level of care.The broad visitor restrictions put in place by many health-care facilities at the start of the pandemic were reasonable responses to a new and previously unknown pathogen. With the benefit of experience, and provided that sufficient personal protective equipment is available, we propose that health-care organisations adopt a new end-of-life visitor policy (panel) that would reduce restrictions overall without necessarily putting patients, staff, and family members at a substantially increased risk of COVID-19 transmission. Elements of this policy might be reasonable outside the end-of-life context, and Munshi and colleagues6The case for relaxing no-visitor policies in hospitals during the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.CMAJ. 2020;
(published online Dec 18.)https://doi.org/10.1503/cmaj.202636
recently proposed more general relaxation of visitor policies. This proposal is not intended as a criticism of those who recommended more rigid restrictions at the start of the pandemic. But the threats of COVID-19 must be placed in context of other threats to health, including those that are harder to appreciate in the short term.PanelProposed elements of an end-of-life visitor policyWe declare no competing interests.Published: January 12, 2021DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S2213-2600(21)00025-4© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.Access this article on ScienceDirectHide CaptionDownloadSee figure in articleToggle Thumbstrip
COVID-19 Resource Centre
Access the latest 2019 novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19) content from across The Lancet journals as it is published.
Hide CaptionDownloadSee figure in ArticleToggle Thumbstrip